The Functional Architecture of Human Intelligence

Nancy Kanwisher
MBL Summer Course August 2015

lots of relevant short talks at:
http://nancysbraintalks.mit.edu/
ENDELEMENTThe key question addressed in this course:

How does the brain produce intelligent behavior and how we may
be able to replicate intelligence in machines?

Many possible approaches (computation, circuits, etc)

Today:

I. Functional architecture of the human brain:
what are the basic components of the system?

II. Methods of Human Cognitive Neuroscience,
strengths and weaknesses of each
with examples from face recognition
ENDELEMENTIs human intelligence the product of:

* special-purpose components, each optimized
to solve a single specific problem?

* more general-purpose machinery that
enables us to tackle a wide range of problems
without being specialized for any of them in
particular?

 

This image is in the public domain.

Who cares?
ENDELEMENTWho Cares about Functional Components?

This question matters because:

* one of the most fundamental questions about the organization of mind
and brain

* a classic way to make progress toward understanding any complicated
system: “divide and conquer”

¢ the particular components have major implications for our
understanding of the computations underlying cognition.

e.g., computational models of face processing will be very different if
they must also be able to work for the recognition of objects, words, and scenes.

Many ways to investigate this question.....
ENDELEMENT1. Spearman (1904), General Intelligence
American Journal of Psychology

In an article sandwiched between a discussion of the soul and
an account of “the psychology of the English sparrow”,.....

Spearman tested (in two schools)
a variety of measures of academic ability (e.g. exam grades in various subjects)
sensory discrimination ability (tones, weights, brightness)

What do you think? Should these things be correlated?

What he found:

most pairs of tasks were correlated with each other

those who do well at school are the same as those who do well at sensory
discrimination.

non obvious and deep, did not have to come out this way!

What he inferred:
The general factor, common to all tasks: g
The specific factor, specific to each task: s
NYMR CROC TMITIITURGI ELDON RMINITORMONITINCO MII Kony
ENDELEMENT2. Franz Joseph Gall (1758-1828)

Distinct mental “faculties” reside in distinct regions of the brain.

1. The instinct of reproduction (located in the cerebellum).

2. The love of one's offspring.

3. Affection; friendship.

4. The instinct of self-defence; courage; the tendency to get into fights.

5. The carnivorous instinct; the tendency to murder.

6. Guile; acuteness; cleverness.

7. The feeling of property; the instinct of stocking up on food (in animals);
covetousness; the tendency to steal.

8. Pride; arrogance; haughtiness; love of authority; loftiness.

9. Vanity; ambition; love of glory (a quality "beneficent for the individual and for
society").

10. Circumspection; forethought.

11. The memory of things; the memory of facts; educability; perfectibility.
12. The sense of places; of space proportions.

 

13. The memory of people; the sense of people.

14. The memory of words.

15. The sense of language; of speech.

16. The sense of colours.

17. The sense of sounds; the gift of music. . .

18. The sense of connectedness between numbers. The right idea,
19. The sense of mechanics, of construction; the talent for architecture.

20. Comparative sagacity. The wrong method.
21. The sense of metaphysics.

22. The sense of satire; the sense of witticism.

23. The poetical talent.

24. Kindness; benevolence; gentleness; compassion; sensitivity; moral sense.

25. The faculty to imitate; the mimic.

26. The organ of religion.
27. The firmness of purpose; constancy; perseverance; obstinacy.
ENDELEMENT3. Lesion Method

¢ Flourens (1794 —1867):

lesioned pigeons and rabbits

“all sensory and volitional faculties exist in the
cerebral hemispheres and must be regarded as occupying
concurrently the same seat in these structures”

¢ Broca announces at the Societe d’ Anthropologie in
1861 that left frontal lobe is the seat of speech.

¢ By 20th century, agreement on cortical specialization for
primary sensory and motor functions;
debate continues on localization of higher-level functions

 

. . . . Reprinted by permission from Macmillan
e Publishers Ltd: Nature Reviews Neuroscience
an important method for answering this question.... Publishers Utd: Nature Reviews Neurosci
human brain lesions to infer function: a
relic from a past era in the fMRI age?",
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 5,
812-819, © 2004.
ENDELEMENTfMRI:

functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging

The best spatial resolution
available for measuring
neural activity noninvasively
in the whole human brain.

Format of Raw Data:

~30,000 3D pixels (“voxels”)
covering the whole brain
sample once every ~2 secs

   

This image is in the public domain.
Increased neural activity >

Increased local blood flow>

Change in oxygenation of hemoglobin
increase in MRI signal
ENDELEMENTTemporal Properties of fMRI (BOLD) Response:
The hemodynamic response function (HRF)

time (seconds)

 

310) BORK)

© Keith Worsley. All rights reserved. This content is excluded from our Creative
Commons license. For more information, see https://ocw.mit.edu/help/faq-fair-use/.

>>>> BOLD response is SLOW, usually peaking around 5-6

seconds after stimulus onset. Several implications.....

 
ENDELEMENTImportant aspects of BOLD signal:

* Because the BOLD signal is based on blood flow, the
temporal resolution is limited by the
jexecentssCoyemey ano) (oLere ma (Onvmpucral t-leleyen
a few 100 milliseconds

¢ Spatial resolution is largely limited by the strength of the signal.
max about | mm at 3 T, a little better at 7T
100s of thousands of neurons in each voxel!

* Cannot measure absolute amounts of activity/metabolism,
only differences between two conditions.
¢ Physiological basis of the BOLD signal is unknown
(Action potentials? Synaptic activity? Inhibition?)
¢ Like other recording methods, cannot test causal role of activity

but even so it has had a major impact...

10
ENDELEMENTFunctional
Organization of the
Human Brain

1957

LEFT CEREBRAL
HEMISPHERE

 

© Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. All rights
reserved. This content is excluded from our Creative Commons
license. For more information, see

Source: Penfield, Wilder. "Some mechanisms of consciousness
discovered during electrical stimulation of the brain."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 44, no-

2 (1958): 51-66.

& then fMRI came along...

Speech Perception

>>A (blurry!) picture AN | Language
of the architecture of Social Perception

Motion
Shape

 

© Source Unknown. All rights reserved. This content is excluded from our Creative

human Milka litxaitas Commons license. For more information, see . cal
ENDELEMENTThe Functional Architecture of Intelligence

The human mind and brain contains a set of highly specialized
components, each solving a different, specific problem.

Each of these regions is present in ~every normal person.
These regions are basic components of the human mind/ brain.
This view is often confused with different ideas

e let’s consider them to get precise about what we mean...
ENDELEMENT 

2. Anatomical Specificity
Is this the only brain region that conducts this mental function?
existence of several regions selectively involved in X is not evidence against #1
3. Necessity
ifs this region necessary for mental function X? Let's face it: it's a cortical network.
This is what we most want to know: causal role. Ishai A’.
4. Sufficiency
Is this region sufficient for the mental function? (never)
5. Interaction/connectivity.
Is this region “part of a network” and does it interact with other regions?
Answer is always yes.
In no way does this argue against #1.
6. Innateness.
Is this region innately specified or is its specificity determined by experience?
A key question, rarely answerable, completely orthogonal to #1.
Functional specificity of a brain region need not imply innateness!

Selectivity of visual word/letter region must be crafted by that individual’s experience
For more info, see NBT video: What is the Role of Experience in the Development of Face Recognition

Neuroimage. 2008 Apr 1;40(2):415-9. Epub 2007 Nov 7.

 
ENDELEMENTAM altmcel-t- Moya all avertceyar-lms) ol-Xerii (eli ava mela) exe) olUit- 1s

Huettel et al (2004): "unlike the phrenologists, who believed that very complex
traits were associated with discrete brain regions, modern researchers recognize
that ....a single brain region may participate in more than one function".

Lisa Feldman Barrett (NYT July 31 2015): "In general, the workings of the
brain are not one-to-one, whereby a given region has a distinct psychological
purpose".

Uttal (2011): “Any studies using brain images that report single areas of
activation exclusively associated with any particular cognitive process should a
priori be considered to be artifacts of the arbitrary thresholds set by
investigators and seriously questioned.”

Please engage with the cata!
Here is some of mine.....
ENDELEMENT=AVATe(=Yalex-M cela ml elalead(e)ar-1 me) el-LeriCegiayg

11nd) MV Kciateteh -
1. Functionally identify the region in each individual strong selectivity, tested
2. Then measure its response in new conditions against lots of
alternatives
present in virtually every
normal subject
Figure removed due to copyright restrictions. Please see the video. part fe)i sats) basic

architecture of the brain

Legitimate
Counterarguments exist
pattern analysis
fer= LUhsy= 1m Ke)(=)
etc.
will return to this
ENDELEMENT=aYdTeo(=Jarer-Wu ce) mm mt UlatediCeyar-l me) el-Lerjiceri ay,

Figure removed due to copyright restrictions. Please see the video.
ENDELEMENTWhat | Mean by Functional Specificity

Figure removed due to copyright restrictions. Please see the video.
ENDELEMENT“Multiple Demand” Regions

(a) Multiple Demand (MD)

  

pre-SMA

S
IF (0, 18, 50)

(41, 23, 29)

es (43, 21, 38) Oy a0)
(41, -59, 40) 4

q
(36, 15, 6)

RPFC
(21, 43, -10) -
AV/FO ACC
(35, 18, 2) (0, 31, 24)

Courtesy of Elsevier, Inc., http://www.sciencedirect.com. Used with permission.
Source: Duncan, John. "The multiple-demand (MD) system of the primate brain:
mental programs for intelligent behaviour." Trends in cognitive sciences 14, no.
4 (2010): 172-179.

* engaged in a wide variety of difficult cognitive tasks

hence “multiple demand”
¢ related to fluid intelligence:
activated during fluid intelligence tasks
causal role in fluid intelligence
6.5 IQ pts/ 10 cm3 of MD cortex
* critical for solving novel problems

A stronger test of this idea....
ENDELEMENTMIT OpenCourseWare
https://ocw.mit.edu

Resource: Brains, Minds and Machines Summer Course
Tomaso Poggio and Gabriel Kreiman

The following may not correspond to a particular course on MIT OpenCourseWare, but has been
provided by the author as an individual learning resource.

For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
ENDELEMENT