DA
rae’

The simple
principles and
practice at the
heart of Agile

o
p Performance
a ae

STATUP ys ~~
ee
———— 4

 
ENDELEMENTBADASS

AGILE

ne
e~

Biographies and
Overview

PART | - INTRO
ENDELEMENTDA
tad

a

ABOUT YOUR SPEAKER

Greg Pitcher

 

Badass Scrum Master / Coach for last 3 years

Member of The Forge — Badass Leadership Immersion

Experience

Coached Service, Product, Software, Leadership teams;
- Genesis Energy NZ working with Customer Call Center, Data

Science, and Leadership teams

Co-collaborator team - Team Mastery book — authored
by Geoff Watts

"..a coaching badass, .. crushing peoples challenges
through respect, love, and sharing awareness ... serving
as Coach and Team as one...nothing changes if nothing

changes!"
ENDELEMENTDA
tad

aR
Chris Williams

+ Author, speaker, Trainer, Executive, Consultant for 25+ years.

* Host of the Badass Agile Podcast (110+ countries, 3 years,

nearly 300 episodes; www.badassagile.com)
* Coach-in-Training, Unbeatable Mind

* Owner/Head Coach of The Forge, a Leadership Immersion

Experience

“,...to connect and ignite people,....to lead a life of
distinction...to create heroes”

 
ENDELEMENTDA
tad

<=
Are You Getting The Results You
Deserve?

In a few words, how would you describe your recent experiences with Agility?

Whether a new transformation or existing team/product, what words best describe your RESULTS?
ENDELEMENTDA
Beee

SUCCESSIVE APPROX. MODEL SAM

Kaizen
Scrum | DOMAIN DRIVEN DESIGN DDD KANBAN “Nexus

GERM SOFTIARE GEVELOPHEN

Pere ” Agnostic Agile WS Agile

 

Scrum bens
Keanbprun. PALE - Waterfall Hopprid le
NEXUS Lean Disciplined Agile DeliveryDAD NEY

   

Modern Agile

“Wiens Hoa = ee
News Heart of Agile vas
SCRUM ‘Comin Adaptive Systems ""s vw
Agile Manufacturing Laan FAST Aide
LEAN Adaptive Software Development

UNIFIED PROCESS UP

Les mreernersse? CRYSTAL | METHODS / CLEAR

Agile - Agile Hybrid‘

UM SCALED AGILE OSAM on
scauene faut I FRAMEWORN (SAFE) Mslre Dew Dactspran! 0D Kaizen Scrumof erums NUS

Karz SERUMBAN Blended Agile ean

RUM ‘Serum EXTREME PROGRAMMING KP Scrum

 

  

WHAT IS NOT WORKING!

As humans we want certainty, and we struggle with the concept of uncommon:

There is currently 30 + ways of doing Agile ranging from from; A to U
The whole alphabet hasn't been used yet, there is room for V,W,X,Y,Z!

The Status Quo of One-Size fits all , from the Industrial era is still

very prevalent, in particular in larger companies

The “Anal-is" following the framework or methodology word for word
not in its essence

The attempting to scale simplicity
ENDELEMENTDA
tad

Root Causes and Beliefs

In groups, we resist risk and uncertainty. Nobody wants to be the person

who sinks the ship.

But the fallacy is that more planning, waiting, analyzing, and discussing will
bring us more certainty. The truth is, it won't; but it’s natural to avoid the

decision to act.

Often, we seek frameworks, solutions, tweaks, hacks, memes, trends....all of

which complicate the playing field, but allow us to defer action.

 
ENDELEMENTDA
tad

SIMPLICITY
Stick with Fundamentals

Much of our problem with implementing agility — or
excellence in general — is our belief that “it can’t be that

simple”.

It is important to focus on effectiveness at the ground floor —
basics like keeping commitments, communicating efficiently
and prioritizing — otherwise, none of the ‘advanced practices’

will work.

Sports and Military teams drill on fundamentals to
perfection, so that the core skill can be summoned

under extreme pressure.

Your performance of fundamentals is what allows
you then to strategize, react and pivot in the
moment...not your memorization of 1000 plays or

routines.

 
ENDELEMENTDA
rd

ne
e~

Solutions

PART II
ENDELEMENTDA
Beee

The qualities that are required to execute work with Agility are the very same
qualities that make excellent leaders:

* They are visionary and service-oriented (THEM vs ME)
* They can prioritize and focus
* They encourage failure, not upfront planning

* They place little value on certainty and safety (they prefer to observe,
orient, decide, act). They LEAP

* They expect members to lead in the absence of orders and certainty,

* They continuously inspect and adapt their own performance, and that
of others

* They thrive where others fear to go — mentally, emotionally,
physically (Smokejumper’s Creed)

 

* THEY BUILD EXCELLENT HABITS = CONSISTENT FORWARD

PROGRESS
10
ENDELEMENTwe

THE BADASS AGILE WAY

* Get Visionary

* Get Focused

* Get Gritty

* Get Humble, get Flexible

 
ENDELEMENTDA
ited

 

GET VISIONARY

Your Vision is your picture of the world once you're done with
it. How will things look because you existed? What values
will you have made real? What is now possible because you

were here?

Having a Vision is like having a map, or the answer to a
question before its asked. You know exactly what to do in
every situation. You are clear and certain, even when the way
forward is not. You no exactly what you will or will not do,
and what you are capable of. You are in complete control of
your destiny.

But if you don’t know where you are going....any road will get
you there. BE INTENTIONAL IN ALL YOU DO.
ENDELEMENTDA
tad

Who You Serve, How
and Why

Another thing to think about is not just what you're passionate
about, but who you're passionate about serving.

We tend to be more fulfilled and more effective when we're
serving something larger than ourselves. That could be your team,

your community, your country OR... your client or your customer.

The next thing you want to figure out is why is it
important for you to serve that group or person?
And finally think about how your vision — and your
unique value can help you serve them.

 
ENDELEMENTDA
tad

7

 

Begin With Intention

Start every week, every day — even every interaction — with
an intention. What will you have or create at the end of
this encounter, or slice of time, that didn't exist before?

How does this move you closer to your goal?
ENDELEMENT 

GET FOCUSED

When doing work in service of your vision, you still have to be
courageous and organized. A badass approaches complexity
and uncertainty by:

* Breaking big things into smaller (measurable) things

* Plans minimally — just enough to get moving — and adapts
+ Uses their best energy to Leap

+ Not caring about opinions or approval. Ask forgiveness...

* Set timers and test/measure experiments
ENDELEMENTDA
Le ited

L e a p Our best buffer against failure is not more study and

certainty. It is to fail early, learn fast, adjust quickly
We are not trained to overcome immovable objects with and repeat the process to evolve toward ultimate
irresistible force. We are trained to wait for certainty and success.

safety before we move. But in our culture, this is massively . es
a : You are not judged on the magnificence of your
expensive in terns of time, money, and opportunity. . we
ideas, or the accuracy of your predictions. You are

The first fundamental we must rehearse is our ability to GO in judged on your fearlessness — your ability to GO.
the absence of a bulletproof plan, and complete certainty.

PRIORITIZE AND CUT THE REST.

 
ENDELEMENTDA
se ited

GET GRITTY

Persistence is everything. If you only outlast your

 

ae tines : competition by 1%, you still win. This requires ability to
endure, to be patient, and to shoulder the hard times and
hard tasks. This includes:

* Doing things that others won't

* Standing between your team and danger

* Becoming ‘extremely accountable’

* Loving Failure

* Staying the course — long-term belief in the vision

* Finding a way, or making one

 

* — Staying inspired, winning first in the mind

* Never Quit
ENDELEMENTDA
tad

a

[EMBRACING THE SUCK
Learn To Love Failure

Failure is associated with shame, because we assume its

effects are negative and permanent. They are not.

Failure is our greatest, best, and FASTEST teacher. You can
find the best path by listening to countless differing opinions,
or you can get out there and find out what doesn’t work.

By discovering what won't work quickly, you can narrow the
field and get to what DOES much faster.

Learn to love the process of hypothesizing, trying,
failing spectacularly, and learning from that failure
to build something that works — even just a little
better than last time.

NO innovator will tell you that failure is avoidable or
undesirable. You will not be an exception; there is no
exception.

 
ENDELEMENTDA
tad

a

Go to the Challenge..

.Don't wait for the challenge to come to you. Practice fear

inoculation.
Shut off your GPS, take the stairs, shut off the hot water.

Have difficult conversations, do a puzzle, challenge your

memory. Compete, try to break your own record. Say ‘Yes’.

 

 

You don't get better by going easier on yourself. You
HAVE to stretch. Surround yourself with people who
believe the same thing and challenge each other.

Make sure that you actually challenge yourself.
Expect to fail, to miss the mark. But expect to rise to

meet the challenge

And right in the moment when you want to quit....go
just

A little

more..
ENDELEMENTtd

GET HUMBLE/GET FLEXIBLE

To truly lead, you must be unattached to outcomes — which means being
vulnerable, being wrong, and getting schooled. You must:

* Continuously Inspect and Adapt Your Game

* Be mindful, emotionally intelligent and aware
* Constantly look for ways to get better

* Know your gaps and have a plan to fill them
* Evaluate your actions in terms of value

+ Be prepared to tear it all down and start over

* Recognize that mastery is a journey

 
ENDELEMENT0
Bate §

4
Action — Inspect And Adapt

Whether you succeed or fail, you have made progress. In Example - at the end of each interaction, ask your
either case, you cannot rest. team or client “what would have made this better?”.

. . . Not lient? N lem. Ask If,
What question(s) will you ask yourself to help you improve? © team or client? No problem. Ask yourself, and

. . . journal the results.
What single improvement or investment can you make that J

will help you get better at solving THIS problem?

 

21
ENDELEMENT0
Bate §

4
Attitude — Making Me Better

To eliminate the negative meanings associated with feedback,
listen carefully to what your body and mind are telling you,
take a moment to breathe, and let the first words out of your

mouth be “thank you for making me better”.

  

22
ENDELEMENTDA
Sane’

Advice on Making it
Stick

PART III
ENDELEMENT0
Bate §

1. Start Fires, Hit Homeruns

Nothing inspires courage and action like victory. To
* Start with small outcomes help Agile grow properly and minimize resistance, pick
+ Execute well - Deliver Consistently over Time something small but highly valuable (never the easiest
. . or quickest) and deliver the smallest meaningful
+ Advertise success — Make work Visible .
increment of value as fast as you can. Then....tell

everyone who will listen.

 

24
ENDELEMENT0
Bate §

2. Let People Decide
How to Grow

* Asin life, don't over-commit/invest too far too early
* Find out what works at small scale, and try to replicate it
* See what breaks in different environments.

* Build minimally effective processes based on what you
learn in practice

a

Nothing wrong with framework or process — used
correctly. The problem is, there is no one-size fits
all. Know the frameworks, steal the best ideas, and
implement them as a series of just-in-time
experiments. Yes, there will be some slips and falls,
but you will waste far less time fixing them than you
will try to plan a generic scaling implementation
without knowing the soul of your teams, business
and customer.

 

25
ENDELEMENTwees

3. Get Leaders Out Of
The Way!

Give control to people , not take control as leaders!
* Inspire trying small changes towards improvement

* Encourage learning, as inspecting and adapting, there is
no failure

+ Advance people getting what they need to do the work

  
ENDELEMENTSUMMARY

A badass does not memorize formulae or read scripts. They simply

operate in a simple, elegant, effective and certain way.

Keep your practice simple. At the personal, team, and customer level, with
macro focus and micro focus, repeat the steps you just learned.

Know your Vision and Service.
Do focused, disciplined, incremental, measurable work.

Be mentally/emotionally tough. Never quit. Love the journey and its
failures

Continually look for gaps and take consistent action to fix them.

 

Repeat.

27
ENDELEMENTDA
Sieur?

THANK YOU
ENDELEMENTQADASS

AGILE

 

CONTACT US

CHRIS@BADASSAGILE.COM

BADASSAGILENRGE@GMAIL.COM

 

29
ENDELEMENT