Reducing the Danger of Nuclear
Weapons and Proliferation
ENDELEMENTTalk Overview

Possible paths to nuclear war?
Proliferation, NPT

Nuclear weapons abolition?
Obama's record

Outlook
ENDELEMENTUtility of Nuclear Weapons

Pro Con
¢ Ended war in ¢ Not necessary;
Japan were the first step

in the cold war
Needlessly killed

¢ Saved casualties

in WW2 j “i
n n
¢ Prevented WW3 . — eSe CIVINANs
between US & nat likely without
USSR y

nuclear weapons
ENDELEMENTNuclear Weapons Questions

No nuclear war since 1945 — deterrence,
nuclear taboo, luck, or other reasons?

Does the possession of nuclear weapons
make a country more secure?

Is the present situation stable?

Is the era of arms control and gradual
reduction of nuclear weapons over?

Should we try to abolish nuclear weapons?
— Is it possible?
ENDELEMENTScientists React to the Bomb

Lab discussions organized

— Chicago: Spring 1945

— Use bomb for demonstration, not on cities

— Share secret of the bomb

No secret, no monopoly, no defense, international control
required

— One World or None

1945: Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Federation of
American Scientists

— Civilian control of atomic energy
Acheson-Lilienthal plan (Oppenheimer): March 1946
Baruch plan

— UN, failure to get agreement

— collapsed by early 1947
ENDELEMENTExpectations about the Bomb:
1945

Atomic Scientists (Oppenheimer, Bohr,
Frank, Szilard)

— It would be so terrifying that a war could be
ended but they warned that its use could lead
to a nuclear arms race and Armageddon

Politicians (Churchill, Roosevelt)
— It would become a powerful influence
ENDELEMENTExpectations about the Bomb:
1945

¢ Atomic Scientists (Oppenheimer, Bohr, Frank, Szilard)

— It would be so terrifying that a war could be ended but they
warned that its use could lead to a nuclear arms race and
Armageddon

¢ Politicians (Churchill, Roosevelt)
— It would become a powerful influence

Neither was fully correct

* Its coercive influence has been small

¢* Possession became a status symbol before NPT

¢ Deterrence, abhorrence > non-use (nuclear taboo)
ENDELEMENTCold War

 

 

™ United States
™@ USSR/Russia

 

 

 

 

1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Year

 

Courtesy of User: Fastfission on Wikipedia. Image is in the public domain.
ENDELEMENTElwood H. Smith cartoon about the nuclear arms race has been removed due to copyright restrictions.
ENDELEMENTTrident Il Submarines

24 D5 missiles: ~ 4 warheads

Warheads: W76 (100 kT), W88 (300 kT)

— (Hiroshima: ~15 kT)

Each sub has ~24x4 = 96 warheads

Could destroy that many targets

Delivery time: 15-30 minutes

Total explosive power > 10 MT

Total allied bombing in WWII: ~3 MT

US has 14 subs, England has 4 (~1/2 at sea)
ENDELEMENTFigure 1: Global Nuclear Stockpiles, 2012

This table provides estimates for the nine countries that possess nuclear
weapons. Russia and the United States have strategic, tactical, and reserve
warheads. Both countries also have thousands of warheads that have
been retired and are planned for dismantlement; those are not included
here. China's nuclear warheads are believed to be stored separately from
delivery vehicles.

 

HH Deployed strategic warheads
Tactical warheads

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reserve warheads
WB Total warheads

 

 

 

 

 

Russia United France China United Israel Pakistan India
Kingdom

ede f American Scientist; International Panel on Fis

 

© Arms Control Today. All rights reserved. This content is excluded from our Creative
Commons license. For more information, see http://ocw.mit.edu/help/faq fair-use/.
ENDELEMENTPathways to Nuclear Escalation

¢ Vulnerability: nuclear weapons + missiles
¢ Fear

¢ Reliance on deterrence (how much is
enough?)
ENDELEMENTPossible Pathways to War

¢ Errors/accidents, aggressive deployment
[launch on warning] > accidental launch
¢ Escalation from conventional war
— Aggressive deployment (India/Pakistan?)
¢ Rogue commancders/insider theft

¢ Theft/sale of fissile material > terrorist
bomb
ENDELEMENTThe Cold War Legacy

“The President of the United States now for 50 years is
followed at all times, 24 hours a day, by a military aide
carrying a football that contains the nuclear codes that
he would use and be authorized to use in the event of a
nuclear attack on the United States. He could launch a
kind of devastating attack the world’s never seen. He
doesn't have to check with anybody. He doesn’t have to
call the Congress. He doesn’t have to check with the
courts. He has that authority because of the nature of the
world we live in.”

Vice President Richard Cheney
ENDELEMENTLaunch on Warning: Accidental
Nuclear War?

US and Russia have ~1000 missiles on alert status
Delivery times: ~15/30 minutes, SLBM/ICBM based
Decision times: ~10 minutes

Probability of error non-negligible (complex systems)
Each side vulnerable to the other’s system

Russian system less robust

Each side does it because the other does

Jan. 2013: Defense Science Board warned that our
command and control system’s vulnerability to
cyber attack had not been fully assessed
ENDELEMENTNuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT), 1970

Limits the spread of nuclear weapons

Currently 189 countries

— 5 with nuclear weapons: US, Russia, UK, France, and
China

Israel, India, Pakistan, and North Korea (withdrew

2003) are not parties to the treaty

Cornerstones
1. Non-proliferation
2. Disarmament: Article VI obligates the nuclear
weapons states to work on eliminating their nuclear
arsenals
3. Right to peacefully use nuclear technology
4. Reviewed each five years at UN; May 2015
ENDELEMENT1974 NPT treaty effectiveness?

5 nuclear powers committed to disarmament (no schedule): US,
Russia, UK, France, China

4 nuclear states outside the treaty: Israel (1967), India (1974),
Pakistan (1990), North Korea (2006)

A.Q. Khan Network, Pakistan (now shut down)

Worries about Iran

2 countries have given up bombs (South Africa & Libya)

Many countries have given up programs: Taiwan, Sweden, Brazil,
Australia, Argentina...

Nuclear capable countries have no weapons: Japan, South Korea,
Germany, Canada...

Fewer countries have bombs than predicted: JFK worried (in 1963)
that 15 to 25 would have them

Political norm is to renounce nuclear weapons and press the haves
to disarm!
ENDELEMENTNPT Problems

¢ North Korea

— 1985: signs NPT, resists IAEA inspections

— 1994-2002: freeze activities, “Agreed Framework”
— 2006: Test 1, ~0.5 kT

— 2009, 2013: Tests 2 and 3, few to 10 kT
— All tests measured by CBTBO
¢ lran: signed NPT

— Enriched activities, problems with IAEA > UN
resolutions, sanctions

— 2013: “First Phase Agreement” & freeze
— Tough negotiations under way
— Hard liners in Iran, US pose threat (Menendez-Kirk)
ENDELEMENTStormy Weather Predicted:
5-Year NPT Review, UN, May 2015

¢ Successful 2010 Nuclear Nonproliferation
Treaty (NPT) Review Conference

¢ Follow-through on 22 interrelated
disarmament step consensus action plan
has been very disappointing

¢ December 2014, Daryl Kimball ACA
ENDELEMENTA Nuclear Free World?
Obama's Prague Speech, April 5, 2009

¢ | state clearly and with conviction America’s
commitment to seek the peace and security of a
world without nuclear weapons.

¢ This goal will not be reached quickly — perhaps not
in my lifetime. It will take patience and persistence.
But we must ignore the voices who tell us that the
world cannot change.

¢ As long as these weapons exist, the US will
maintain a safe, secure, and effective arsenal to
deter any adversary, and guarantee that defense
to our allies.
ENDELEMENTArguments Against Nuclear
Weapons Abolition

Dangerous: eliminates deterrence
Suggests weakness
Will not deter Iran, North Korea, ...

Imposes impossible inspection
requirements

Cannot be achieved
Nuclear weapons cannot be un-invented
ENDELEMENTDeterrence

* Preventing a direct attack on a nuclear armed power
— This has worked, or at least it never has happened
* Coercive diplomacy [changing unwanted actions]

— This has almost never worked: Russian takeover of Eastern
Europe, Korean War, Chinese bomb...

¢ Enables brinkmanship: Pakistan/India, Berlin crisis
* Requires showing “resolve” (crisis instability)

* Requires rational and accurate decision makers

* Does not work against an accidental use

¢ Unlikely to work against terrorists

Deterrence requires small numbers of weapons — more
leads to instability (could cause war)
ENDELEMENTShould We Try to Abolish Nuclear
Weapons?

There is no risk free world!

The present situation is not stable: we
could be lucky for a long time, but we can’t
be sure

Fewer nuclear weapons increase safety
Abolition is a goal worth working towards,
even if we don’t get there. We have

committed ourselves in Article VI of the
NPT!
ENDELEMENTObama’s Record

Raised hopes in Prague speech

New Start Treaty

Improved Nuclear Security (Summits)

Trying to engage Russia in further steps (difficult)
Nuclear posture review — only slightly modified
~1000 nuclear weapons still on launch on warning
(US, Russia)

North Korea: strategic patience (i.e., neglect the
issue)

Modernizing nuclear weapons, delivery systems
ENDELEMENTsome Reasons for Optimism

No nuclear war since 1945
— Deterrence, nuclear taboo, luck
NPT working reasonably well

CTBO in operation: detected ~0.5 kT North
Korean test

Budget constraints in Russia and US may lead to
nuclear force reductions

World wide discussion of zero nuclear weapons
Look for fireworks at UN May 2015 NPT review
Public opinion counts!
ENDELEMENTArms Control Organizations

Council for a Livable World

— Nuclear physicist Leo Szilard founded Council for a Livable World in 1962 to deliver
“the sweet voice of reason” about nuclear weapons to Congress, the White House,
and the American public.

— AWashington, DC based non-profit, non-partisan advocacy organization dedicated to
reducing the danger of nuclear weapons and increasing national security. Our mission
is to advocate for sensible national security policies and to help elect congressional
candidates who support them.

The Arms Control Organization (ACA)

— Founded in 1971, is a national nonpartisan membership organization dedicated to
promoting public understanding of and support for effective arms control policies.
Through its public education and media programs and its magazine, Arms Control
Today (ACT), ACA provides policy makers, the press, and the interested public with
authoritative information, analysis, and commentary on arms control proposals,
negotiations and agreements, and related national security issues.

Federation of American Scientists (FAS)
Peace Action: Grassroots peace network
ENDELEMENTNuclear Weapons Questions

No nuclear war since 1945 — deterrence, nuclear
taboo, luck, or other reasons? [all]

Does the possession of nuclear weapons make a
country more secure? [probably not]

Is the present situation stable? [with luck]

Is the era of arms control and gradual reduction of
nuclear weapons over? [next few years bleak]
Should we abolish nuclear weapons [we should
try] and is it possible? [even less likely]
ENDELEMENTConclusions: Plenty of Work to do
to Reduce the Danger of Nuclear
War

Deal constructively with Iran and North Korea
Take weapons off hair-trigger alert

Russia: resolve ballistic missile defense issue, reduce
weapons to ~1000 including tactical, reduce stockpile

Bring other nuclear powers into discussion

— Include India, Pakistan, and Israel

Secure nuclear material

Fissile material cutoff treaty

Stockpile stewardship program (maintain, not modernize)
Use budget constraints to improve nuclear weapons policy
Speed elimination of retired nuclear weapons

Pass the CTBT in the US Senate
ENDELEMENTMIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu

RES.8-004 Reducing the Danger of Nuclear Weapons and Proliferation
January IAP 2015

For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
ENDELEMENT